
Here’s a list of Top 12 HTML5 Features, which are explained in detail below:


1. Semantic Elements

When constructing an HTML script, the term “semantic” refers to the meaning of the text. Semantics, to put it simply, is the use of HTML tags that accurately reflect the content they contain. For instance, using the <div> tag doesn’t suggest the content it will carry, however using the <p> tag suggests it can be used to hold paragraph information. 

2. Audio and Video Support

One of the many HTML 5 features is the support for audio and video. It has reduced the hassle of relying upon third-party services such as Adobe Flash player. To embed Audio and Video into your HTML document, you may use the following two tags, <audio> and <video> tags. 

3. Canvas Elements

Canvas Elements is a top-notch feature that has made the tedious task of handling graphics easier for developers. With the help of Canvas elements, you can easily draw graphics using JavaScript. It is optimum for creating simple animations and drawing photo compositions.

4. Geolocation API

The Geolocation API is an HTML feature that is used to access the geographical position of a user, however, it is not accessed unless the user approves of it. If you’re wondering where this feature is useful, these come in handy while creating apps like taxi apps, food order tracking apps, fitness tracking apps, and more. 

5. Local Storage 

It is a modern feature of HTML and several browsers that typically store data in the user’s browsers and can access them with the help of JavaScript APIs. This feature is useful for creating offline applications where data is need to be stored locally. 

6. Responsive Images

Earlier to create responsive images on the web, you have to rely upon several lines of CSS and sometimes JavaScript, however, HTML 5 makes the process handy by including srcset attribute to specify multiple versions of an image at different screen resolutions. 

7. Web Workers

When you are performing several demanding tasks at once, the browser gets sluggish and responds slowly. Because of this, web workers were added to HTML 5 to allow scripts to operate in the background without interfering with the UI thread. 

8. Drag and Drop API

Drag and drop is among the most unique features of HTML5 that allow you to grab any element in the DOM and drop it to a different location. To create an element able to drag and drop, set the attribute “draggable” on the tag and put its value to true. 

9. Form enhancements

HTML 5 introduces new features for your existing forms on HTML to create a more robust user experience. Some of the key enhancements in the new HTML 5 include new input times such as email, URL, and more, placeholder text, required fields feature, validation, and more. 

10. Web Sockets

In the previous versions of HTML, when a client sends a request to the backend server, the server then responds afterward. However, in HTML 5 we can establish a bidirectional live communication between the server and the client (a web browser) to reduce the latency in the responses. 

11. Micro Data 

Micro Data in simpler words is a further deeper level to provide semantics to your webpage. This feature is used to structure data in HTML documents by embedding your own customized elements.

12. Cross Document Messaging

In general, web browsers don’t let web pages from different domains influence each other, this is done for several security reasons, however, even if the web pages don’t intend to intrigue the privacy or harm the other web page. There are several scenarios, in which you want to access cross-document communication to make your web page more interactive with less effort. 







